# Packaging and Build Systems

The OCaml toolchain is structured much like a C compiler, with several tools
that generate intermediate files and finally link against a runtime.  The
final outputs don't have to be just executables. Many people embed OCaml code as
object files that are called from other applications, or even compile it to
Javascript and other esoteric targets.  Let's start by covering some of the
standard OCaml tools, and then move on to some of the higher level methods for
packaging and publishing your code online.

## The OCaml toolchain

There are two distinct compilers for OCaml code included in the standard
distribution. The first outputs bytecode that is interpreted at runtime, 
and the second generates fast, efficient native code directly. Both of these
share the front-end type-checking logic, and only diverge when it comes to
code generation.

### The `ocamlc` bytecode compiler

The simplest code generator is the `ocamlc` compiler, which outputs portable
bytecode that is interpreted via the `ocamlrun` runtime.  The OCaml bytecode
virtual machine is a stack machine (much like the Java Virtual Machine), with
the exception of a single register that stores the more recent result.  This
provides a simple runtime model that is easy to implement, but executes rather
slowly due to being interpreted.

Here are some of the files generated by `ocamlc`:

Extension  Generated By     Purpose
---------  ------------     -------
.ml        manual/codegen   Source files for compilation unit module implementations.
.mli       manual/codegen   Source files for compilation unit module interfaces. If missing, generated from the `.ml` file.
.cmi       ocamlc           Compiled module interface from a corresponding `.mli` source file.
.cmo       ocamlc           Compiled bytecode object file of the module implementation.
.cma       ocamlc           Library of bytecode object files packed into a single file.
.o         ocamlc           C source files are compiled into native object files by the system `cc`.

### The `ocamlopt` native code compiler

Extension  Purpose
---------  -------
.cmi       Compiled module interface from a corresponding `.mli` source file. (_avsm_: this is not compatible with the ocamlc version iirc)
.o         Compiled native object file of the module implementation.
.cmx       Contains extra information for linking and cross-module optimization of the unit.
.cmxa/.a   Library of `cmx` and `o` units, stored in the `cmxa` and `a` files respectively.

### The `ocaml` top-level loop

## The Findlib compiler frontend

## Packaging applications with OASIS 

### ocamlbuild

## Distributing applications with OPAM

