# Developer Guide

This guide is intended for new Menhir developers, and is supposed explain how
things work.

## How Menhir is Built

Menhir is built by `dune`. The build process takes place in several
stages:

* The library MenhirLib, whose source files reside in `lib`, is built.
  This is the runtime support library for the parsers generated by
  Menhir in `--table` mode.

* The library MenhirSdk, whose source files reside in `sdk`, is built.
  This library allows reading automaton description (`.cmly`) files.

* A preliminary version of Menhir, referred to as "stage 1", is built.
  In order to build Menhir's parser, `ocamlyacc` is used.
  The parser and driver in `src/stage1` are used.

* The final version of Menhir, referred to as "stage 2", is built.
  In order to build Menhir's parser, (the stage 1 version of) Menhir itself is used.
  The parser and driver in `src/stage2` are used.

* As a sanity check, another version of Menhir,
  referred to as "stage 3", is built.
  In order to build Menhir's parser, the stage-2 Menhir is used.
  The parser and driver in `src/stage2` are used again.
  We check that a fixed point is reached, that is,
  the stage-2 and stage-3 versions of Menhir
  behave in the same way when applied to Menhir's grammar.

## Testing

To run all tests except the speed test, type `make test` in the root
directory.

To run the speed test, type `make speed` in the root directory.

The tests in the directory `test/static` test that Menhir seems to run properly,
but do not test the generated parser.

* The subdirectory `test/static/good` contains a number of correct `.mly` files.
  We check that Menhir accepts these files and
  compare the output of `menhir --only-preprocess` against an expected output.
  We do not check that Menhir actually produces a working parser.

* The subdirectory `test/static/bad` contains a number of incorrect `.mly` files.
  We checks that Menhir rejects these files
  and produces the expected error message.

The tests in the directory `test/dynamic` test the generated parsers.
See the [README](test/dynamic/README.md) file there.

The demos in the directory `demos` also contain tests.

## Releasing

Prior to making a release, please take the following actions:

* Make sure `CHANGES.md` has been properly updated.

* Make sure that you are on the `master` branch and have
  committed everything. No uncommitted files should remain.

* Run `make test` and `make versions` to make sure that Menhir can be compiled
  and passes all tests under all supported versions of OCaml.

* Run `make speed` and have a look at the performance figures to
  make sure that they are still in the right ballpark.

* Test the `opam` package by running `make pin`
  (possibly in a dedicated switch, so as to avoid clobbering your
  current installation of Menhir).
  If `make pin` succeeds, then its effect can be undone by `make unpin`.

To create a release, run `make release`. This creates a release and commits it
to a fresh release branch. It also commits a copy of the documentation to the
master branch. The effects of this command are local; nothing is pushed or
published.

If you are happy with the outcome of `make release`, you can then proceed to
the following three steps:

* Run `make publish` to push the new release to `gitlab.inria.fr`.

* Run `make export` to upload the documentation to Menhir's home page.

* Run `make opam` to create and publish a new `opam` package.

If you are not happy with the outcome of `make release`, you can undo it
by typing `make undo`.

## About the Module Ordering

Some toplevel modules have side effects and must be executed in the
following order:

| Module                | Task |
| --------------------- | ---- |
| Settings              | parses the command line |
| PreFront              | reads the grammar description files |
| TokenType             | deals with `--only-tokens` and exits |
| Front                 | deals with `--depend`, `--infer`, `--only-preprocess`, and exits |
| Grammar               | performs a number of analyses of the grammar |
| Lr0                   | constructs the LR(0) automaton |
| Slr                   | determines whether the grammar is SLR |
| Lr1                   | constructs the LR(1) automaton |
| Conflict              | performs default conflict resolution and explains conflicts |
| Invariant             | performs a number of analyses of the automaton |
| Interpret             | deals with `--interpret` and exits |
| Back                  | produces the output and exits |

A few artificial dependencies have been added in the code in order
to ensure that this ordering is respected by `ocamlbuild`.
