# Prologue

## Why OCaml?

Programming languages matter. They affect the reliability, security, and
efficiency of the code you write, as well as how easy it is to read,
refactor, and extend. The languages you know can also change how you think,
influencing the way you design software even when you're not using them.

We wrote this book because we believe in the importance of programming
languages, and that OCaml in particular is an important language to
learn.  Both of us have been using OCaml in our academic and
professional lives for over 20 years, and in that time we've come to
see it as a powerful tool for building complex software systems. This
book aims to make this tool available to a wider audience, by
providing a clear guide to what you need to know to use OCaml
effectively in the real world.

What makes OCaml special is that it occupies a sweet spot in the space
of programming language designs. It provides a combination of
efficiency, expressiveness and practicality that is matched by no
other language. That is in large part because OCaml is an elegant
combination of a set of language features that have been developed
over the last 60 years. These include: [OCaml/key features of]{.idx}

- *Garbage collection* for automatic memory management, now a common
  feature of modern, high-level languages.

- *First-class functions* that can be passed around like ordinary
  values, as seen in JavaScript, Common Lisp, and C#.

- *Static type-checking* to increase performance and reduce the number
  of runtime errors, as found in Java and C#.

- *Parametric polymorphism*, which enables the construction of
  abstractions that work across different data types, similar to
  generics in Java, Rust, and C# and templates in C++.

- Good support for *immutable programming*, *i.e.*, programming
  without making destructive updates to data structures. This is
  present in traditional functional languages like Scheme, and is also
  commonly found in everything from distributed, big-data frameworks
  to user-interface toolkits.

- *Type inference*, so you don't need to annotate every variable in
  your program with its type. Instead, types are inferred based on how
  a value is used. Available in a limited form in C# with implicitly
  typed local variables, and in C++11 with its `auto` keyword.

- *Algebraic data types* and *pattern matching* to define and
  manipulate complex data structures. Available in Scala, Rust, and
  F#.

Some of you will know and love all of these features, and for others
they'll be largely new, but most of you will have seen some of them in
other languages that you've used. As we'll demonstrate over the course
of this book, there is something transformative about having all these
features together and able to interact in a single language. Despite
their importance, these ideas have made only limited inroads into
mainstream languages, and when they do arrive there, like first-class
functions in C# or parametric polymorphism in Java, it's typically in
a limited and awkward form. The only languages that completely embody
these ideas are *statically typed, functional programming languages*
like OCaml, F#, Haskell, Scala, Rust, and Standard ML.[OCaml/benefits
of]{.idx}

Among this worthy set of languages, OCaml stands apart because it
manages to provide a great deal of power while remaining highly
pragmatic. The compiler has a straightforward compilation strategy
that produces performant code without requiring heavy optimization and
without the complexities of dynamic just-in-time (JIT)
compilation. This, along with OCaml's strict evaluation model, makes
runtime behavior easy to predict. The garbage collector is
*incremental*, letting you avoid large garbage collection (GC)-related
pauses, and *precise*, meaning it will collect all unreferenced data
(unlike many reference-counting collectors), and the runtime is simple
and highly portable.

All of this makes OCaml a great choice for programmers who want to
step up to a better programming language, and at the same time get
practical work done.

### A Brief History

OCaml was written in 1996 by Xavier Leroy, Jérôme Vouillon, Damien
Doligez, and Didier Rémy at INRIA in France. It was inspired by a long
line of research into ML starting in the 1960s, and continues to have
deep links to the academic community.[OCaml/history of]{.idx}

ML was originally the *meta language* of the LCF (Logic for Computable
Functions) proof assistant released by Robin Milner in 1972 (at
Stanford, and later at Cambridge). ML was turned into a compiler in
order to make it easier to use LCF on different machines, and it was
gradually turned into a full-fledged system of its own by the 1980s.

The first implementation of Caml appeared in 1987. It was created by
Ascánder Suárez (as part of the Formel project at INRIA headed by
Gérard Huet) and later continued by Pierre Weis and Michel Mauny. In
1990, Xavier Leroy and Damien Doligez built a new implementation
called Caml Light that was based on a bytecode interpreter with a
fast, sequential garbage collector. Over the next few years useful
libraries appeared, such as Michel Mauny's syntax manipulation tools,
and this helped promote the use of Caml in education and research
teams.

Xavier Leroy continued extending Caml Light with new features, which
resulted in the 1995 release of Caml Special Light. This improved the
executable efficiency significantly by adding a fast native code
compiler that made Caml's performance competitive with mainstream
languages such as C++. A module system inspired by Standard ML also
provided powerful facilities for abstraction and made larger-scale
programs easier to construct.

The modern OCaml emerged in 1996, when a powerful and elegant object
system was implemented by Didier Rémy and Jérôme Vouillon. This object
system was notable for supporting many common object-oriented idioms
in a statically type-safe way, whereas the same idioms required
runtime checks in languages such as C++ or Java. In 2000, Jacques
Garrigue extended OCaml with several new features such as polymorphic
methods, variants, and labeled and optional arguments.

The last two decades has seen OCaml attract a significant user base,
and language improvements have been steadily added to support the
growing commercial and academic codebases.  By 2012, the OCaml 4.0
release had added Generalized Algebraic Data Types (GADTs) and
first-class modules to increase the flexibility of the language. Since
then, OCaml has had a steady yearly release cadence, and OCaml 5.0
with multicore support is around the corner in 2022.  There is also
fast native code support for the latest CPU architectures such as
x86_64, ARM, RISC-V and PowerPC, making OCaml a good choice for
systems where resource usage, predictability, and performance all
matter.

### The `Base` Standard Library {#the-core-standard-library}

However good it is, a language on its own isn't enough. You also need
a set of libraries to build your applications on. A common source of
frustration for those learning OCaml is that the standard library that
ships with the compiler is limited, covering only a subset of the
functionality you would expect from a general-purpose standard
library. That's because the standard library isn't really a
general-purpose tool; its fundamental role is in bootstrapping the
compiler, and has been purposefully kept small and portable.

Happily, in the world of open source software, nothing stops
alternative libraries from being written to supplement the
compiler-supplied standard library. `Base` is an example of such a
library, and it's the standard library we'll use through most of this
book. [Base standard library]{.idx}

Jane Street, a company that has been using OCaml for more than 20
years, developed the code in `Base` for its own internal use, but from
the start designed it with an eye toward being a general-purpose
standard library. Like the OCaml language itself, `Base` is engineered
with correctness, reliability, and performance in mind. It's also
designed to be easy to install and highly portable. As such, it works
on every platform OCaml does, including UNIX, macOS, Windows, and
JavaScript.

`Base` is distributed with a set of syntax extensions that provide
useful new functionality to OCaml, and there are additional libraries
that are designed to work well with it, including `Core`, an extension
to `Base` that includes a wealth of new data structures and tools; and
`Async`, a library for concurrent programming of the kind that often
comes up when building user interfaces or networked applications. All
of these libraries are distributed under a liberal Apache 2 license to
permit free use in hobby, academic, and commercial settings.

### The OCaml Platform

`Base` is a comprehensive and effective standard library, but there's
much more OCaml software out there. A large community of programmers
has been using OCaml since its first release in 1996, and has
generated many useful libraries and tools. We'll introduce some of
these libraries in the course of the examples presented in the
book.[OCaml/third-party libraries for]{.idx}

The installation and management of these third-party libraries is made
much easier via a package management tool known as
[opam](https://opam.ocaml.org/).  We'll explain more about opam as the
book unfolds, but it forms the basis of the OCaml Platform, which is a
set of tools and libraries that, along with the OCaml compiler, lets
you build real-world applications quickly and effectively.
Constituent tools of the OCaml Platform include the
[dune](https://dune.build) build system and a language server to
integrate with popular editors such as Visual Studio Code (or Emacs or
Vim).

We'll also use opam for installing the `utop` command-line
interface. This is a modern interactive tool that supports command
history, macro expansion, module completion, and other niceties that
make it much more pleasant to work with the language. We'll be using
`utop` throughout the book to let you step through the examples
interactively.


## About This Book

*Real World OCaml* is aimed at programmers who have some experience
with conventional programming languages, but not specifically with
statically typed functional programming. Depending on your background,
many of the concepts we cover will be new, including traditional
functional-programming techniques like higher-order functions and
immutable data types, as well as aspects of OCaml's powerful type and
module systems.

If you already know OCaml, this book may surprise you. Base redefines
most of the standard namespace to make better use of the OCaml module
system and expose a number of powerful, reusable data structures by
default. Older OCaml code will still interoperate with Base, but you
may need to adapt it for maximal benefit. All the new code that we
write uses Base, and we believe the Base model is worth learning; it's
been successfully used on large, multimillion-line codebases and
removes a big barrier to building sophisticated applications in OCaml.

Code that uses only the traditional compiler standard library will
always exist, but there are other online resources for learning how
that works.  *Real World OCaml* focuses on the techniques the authors
have used in their personal experience to construct scalable, robust
software systems.

### What to Expect

*Real World OCaml* is split into three parts:

- Part I covers the language itself, opening with a guided tour
  designed to provide a quick sketch of the language. Don't expect to
  understand everything in the tour; it's meant to give you a taste of
  many different aspects of the language, but the ideas covered there
  will be explained in more depth in the chapters that follow.

  After covering the core language, Part I then moves onto more
  advanced features like modules, functors, and objects, which may
  take some time to digest. Understanding these concepts is important,
  though. These ideas will put you in good stead even beyond OCaml
  when switching to other modern languages, many of which have drawn
  inspiration from ML.

- Part II builds on the basics by working through useful tools and
  techniques for addressing common practical applications, from
  command-line parsing to asynchronous network programming. Along the
  way, you'll see how some of the concepts from Part I are glued
  together into real libraries and tools that combine different
  features of the language to good effect.

- Part III discusses OCaml's runtime system and compiler toolchain. It
  is remarkably simple when compared to some other language
  implementations (such as Java's or .NET's CLR). Reading this part
  will enable you to build very-high-performance systems, or to
  interface with C libraries. This is also where we talk about
  profiling and debugging techniques using tools such as GNU `gdb`.

### Installation Instructions

*Real World OCaml* uses some tools that we've developed while writing
this book. Some of these resulted in improvements to the OCaml
compiler, which means that you will need to ensure that you have an
up-to-date development environment (using the 4.14.1 version of the
compiler). The installation process is largely automated through the
opam package manager. Instructions on how to set it up and what
packages to install can be found at [the installation
page](http://dev.realworldocaml.org/install.html).[installation
instructions]{.idx}[OCaml/installation instructions]{.idx}

Some of the libraries we use, notably `Base`, work anywhere OCaml
does, and in particular work on Windows and JavaScript.  The examples
in Part I of the book will for the most part stick to such highly
portable libraries.[OCaml/operating system support]{.idx} Some of the
libraries used, however, require a UNIX based operating system, and so
only work on systems like macOS, Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and the
Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL).  `Core` and `Async` are notable
examples here.

This book is not intended as a reference manual.  We aim to teach you
about the language as well as the libraries, tools, and techniques
that will help you be a more effective OCaml programmer.  But it's no
replacement for API documentation or the OCaml manual and man pages.
You can find documentation for all of the libraries and tools
referenced in the book [online](https://v3.ocaml.org/packages).

### Code Examples

All of the code examples in this book are available freely online
under a public-domain-like license. You are welcome to copy and use
any of the snippets as you see fit in your own code, without any
attribution or other restrictions on their use.[OCaml/code examples
for]{.idx}

The full text of the book, along with all of the example code is
available online at [<em
class="hyperlink">https://github.com/realworldocaml/book</em>](https://github.com/realworldocaml/book).

## Contributors

We would especially like to thank the following individuals for improving
*Real World OCaml*:

- Jason Hickey was our co-author on the first edition of this book,
  and is instrumental to the structure and content that formed the
  basis of this revised edition.

- Leo White and Jason Hickey contributed greatly to the content and
  examples in [Objects](objects.html#objects){data-type=xref} and
  [Classes](classes.html#classes){data-type=xref}.

- Jeremy Yallop authored and documented the Ctypes library described
  in [Foreign Function
  Interface](foreign-function-interface.html#foreign-function-interface){data-type=xref}.

- Stephen Weeks is responsible for much of the modular architecture
  behind Base and Core, and his extensive notes formed the basis of
  [Memory Representation Of
  Values](runtime-memory-layout.html#memory-representation-of-values){data-type=xref}
  and [Understanding The Garbage
  Collector](garbage-collector.html#understanding-the-garbage-collector){data-type=xref}.
  Sadiq Jaffer subsequently refreshed the garbage collector chapter to
  reflect the latest changes in OCaml 4.13.

- Jérémie Dimino, the author of `utop`, the interactive command-line
  interface that is used throughout this book. We're particularly
  grateful for the changes that he pushed through to make `utop` work
  better in the context of the book.

- Thomas Gazagnaire, Thibaut Mattio, David Allsopp and Jonathan Ludlam
  contributed to the OCaml Platform chapter, including fixes to core
  tools to better aid new user installation.

- Ashish Agarwal, Christoph Troestler, Thomas Gazagnaire, Etienne
  Millon, Nathan Rebours, Charles-Edouard Lecat, Jules Aguillon, Rudi
  Grinberg, Sonja Heinze and Frederic Bour worked on improving the
  book's toolchain. This allowed us to update the book to track
  changes to OCaml and various libraries and tools.  Ashish also
  developed a new and improved version of the book's website.

- David Tranah, Clare Dennison, Anna Scriven and Suresh Kumar from
  Cambridge University Press for input into the layout of the print edition.
  Airlie Anderson drew the cover art, and Christy Nyberg advised on the
  design and layout.

- The many people who collectively submitted over 4000 comments to
  online drafts of this book, through whose efforts countless errors
  were found and fixed.
